Preparing change log for beta release (#147)
silverstripe/developer-docs: en/04_Changelogs/beta/5.0.0-beta1.md

# Silverstripe CMS 5.0.0-beta1

This is the first beta release for Silverstripe CMS 5. This is a pre-release version of Silverstripe CMS 5. It is not suitable for a production environment.

We are anticipating that we will tag a Silverstripe CMS 5 Release candidate in March 2023 and a stable release in April 2023.

## Trying the beta

Creating a Silverstripe CMS 5 test project is just as easy as before. Simply run this command to try out the Silverstripe CMS 5 beta.

```
composer create-project silverstripe/installer my-site 5.0.0-beta1
```

## Reporting bugs

> If you find a bugs in the beta, report it by [creating an issue against the relevant GitHub repository](https://github.com/silverstripe). Put "CMS5-beta" in the title of your issue to make it easier for our development team to identify it.

Author: ```suggestion
If you find a bugs in the beta, report it by [creating an issue against the relevant GitHub repository](https://github.com/silverstripe). Prefix the title of your issue with "CMS5-beta" to make it easier for our development team to identify it.
```

> You can [create the issue against silverstripe/framework](https://github.com/silverstripe/silverstripe-framework/issues/new) if you are not sure which GitHub repository should host the issue.

Author: ```suggestion
You can [create the issue against `silverstripe/framework`](https://github.com/silverstripe/silverstripe-framework/issues/new) if you are not sure which GitHub repository should host the issue.
```

## Change freeze

> ### Post CMS5 beta freeze

Author: ```suggestion

### Post CMS5 beta freeze
```

> # Silverstripe CMS 5.0.0-beta1

Reviewer: ```suggestion---
title: 5.0.0-beta1 (unreleased)
---

# 5.0.0-beta1 (unreleased)
```

This changelog needs to have the unreleased title until we're ready to release it (removing this is part of the release process). It should also reflect the same title format as all other releases.

Author: I'm hoping that the "unreleased" timeframe will be small enough that this doesn't matter.

Reviewer: We should still follow the standard process and it won't take long for you to update it. Really it should have _already_ been marked unreleased...

Author: Done.

Reviewer: Still not done? Please look at the actual suggestion. It needs to have:
```md
---
title: 5.0.0-beta1 (unreleased)
---

# 5.0.0-beta1 (unreleased)
```

The title must be simplified (because that's standard to literally all the other changelogs) and it needs the title block separate to the heading, because that controls what's displayed on the card in the list of changelogs.

This is the first beta release for Silverstripe CMS 5. This is a pre-release version of Silverstripe CMS 5. It is not suitable for a production environment.

> We are anticipating that we will tag a Silverstripe CMS 5 Release Candidate in March 2023 and a stable release in April 2023.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We are anticipating that we will tag a Silverstripe CMS 5 Release Candidate (RC) in March 2023 and a stable release in April 2023.
```

  - [Upgrade your constraints](#upgrade-your-constraints)
  - [Ship a Silverstripe CMS 5 version of your module](#ship-a-silverstripe-cms-5-version-of-your-module)
- [Change to commercially supported modules](#supported-modules)
- [Fixed dependencies](#fixed-depdencies)
- [API changes](#api-changes)
  - [Removed API (by module, alphabetically)](#api-removed)
  - [General changes](#api-general)
  - [Email](#api-email)
  - [ORM](#api-orm)
- [Dependency changes](#dependency-changes)
  - [General changes](#dep-general)
  - [TinyMCE upgraded from 4 to 6](#tinymce6)
- [Front-end build stack upgrades](#front-end)
  - [Webpack config](#webpack-config)
  - [Updated javascript dependencies](#updated-javascript-dependencies)
  - [Common upgrade patterns](#common-upgrade-patterns)
  - [Breaking changes in _our_ javascript components or API](#js-api)
- [Other Breaking Changes](#other-breaking-changes)
  - [URLs generated by Silverstripe CMS don't include a trailing slash by default](#trailing-slash)
  - [CWP Agency Extensions](#cwp-agency-extensions)
- [Features and enhancements](#features-and-enhancements)
  - [Other features](#other-features)
- [Bugfixes](#bugfixes)

> ## About the Beta phase

Reviewer: I don't think we use the word "phase" literally anywhere else.... should we just say "release" instead for consistency?

### Trying the beta

> Creating a Silverstripe CMS 5 test project is just as easy as before. Simply run this command to try out the Silverstripe CMS 5 beta.

Reviewer: Just as easy as before what? Do you mean "just as easy as any other Silverstripe CMS project"?

> Creating a Silverstripe CMS 5 test project is just as easy as before. Simply run this command to try out the Silverstripe CMS 5 beta.

Reviewer: We should add a paragraph above this about how it still has the normal server requirements, and link to them. That way if anyone says "But when I try this it says command composer not found" we can say "Click the link that mentions server requirements"

Author: I'll add a bit about PHP8.1 and lint off the the Server Requirements page. I'll quickly updates those as well.

> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```bash
```

Author: Done

> composer create-project silverstripe/installer my-site 5.0.0-beta1

Reviewer: I still prefer this format - but feel free to take or leave this suggestion as it's highly subjective and both formats will do the same thing.
```suggestion
composer create-project silverstripe/installer:5.0.0-beta1 my-site
```

```

> ## Reporting bugs

Reviewer: We should also encourage people to create pull requests (linked to the relevant issue, which they should create first if it doesn't already exist) to resolve regressions - and we should link to the contributing guidelines.

Author: I've added a blurb to that affect at the end of the section.

> If you find a bugs in the beta, report it by [creating an issue against the relevant GitHub repository](https://github.com/silverstripe). Prefix the title of your issue with "CMS5-beta" to make it easier for our development team to identify it.

Reviewer: Either the link should be to docs about _how_ to create an issue, or the only text that should be part of the link is "the relevant GitHub repository"

> You can [create the issue against `silverstripe/framework`](https://github.com/silverstripe/silverstripe-framework/issues/new) if you are not sure which GitHub repository should host the issue.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can [create the issue against `silverstripe/silverstripe-framework`](https://github.com/silverstripe/silverstripe-framework/issues/new) if you are not sure which GitHub repository should host the issue.
```
We're talking about the github repo, so we shouldn't use the packagist name.

  - [Common upgrade patterns](#common-upgrade-patterns)
  - [Breaking changes in _our_ javascript components or API](#js-api)
- [Other Breaking Changes](#other-breaking-changes)
  - [URLs generated by Silverstripe CMS don't include a trailing slash by default](#trailing-slash)
  - [CWP Agency Extensions](#cwp-agency-extensions)
- [Features and enhancements](#features-and-enhancements)
  - [Other features](#other-features)
- [Bugfixes](#bugfixes)

## About the Beta release

### Trying the beta

Creating a Silverstripe CMS 5 test project is just as easy as with Silverstripe CMS 4. Simply run this command to try out the Silverstripe CMS 5 beta.

```bash
composer create-project silverstripe/installer:5.0.0-beta1 my-site
```

Silverstripe CMS 5 requires at least PHP 8.1.

Review the [Server Requirements](/getting_started/server_requirements) for all the details.

## Reporting bugs

If you find a bugs in the beta, report it by creating an issue against the relevant GitHub repository. Prefix the title of your issue with "CMS5-beta" to make it easier for our development team to identify it.

Look at [Reporting Bugs](/contributing/issues_and_bugs) for more informations.

> After creating an issue, maybe have a go at creating a pull request to fix it. Remember to link back your pull request to a matching issue to help the CMS development team review your work.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After creating an issue, maybe have a go at creating a pull request to fix it. Please read our [Contributing Code](https://docs.silverstripe.org/en/5/contributing/code/) documentation before doing so. Remember to link back your pull request to a matching issue to help the CMS development team review your work.
```

Author: I rewrote your suggestion to avoid "link splatter".

TLDR You should avoid pepering links through your content.

https://blog.canada.ca/2021/07/20/effective-links.html#avoid-link-splatter

Reviewer: It's one link.... but okay.

Non-breaking API changes and enhancements may be merged after the initial CMS 5 beta release.

### Post CMS5 RC freeze
Once the initial CMS5.0 RC is released, non-breaking API changes will no longer be accepted and will have to be targeted to CMS5.1.

Bug fixes may be accepted if they can be solved without changing APIs.

## Upgrading your third party module

One of the primary purposes of the beta testing phase is to give third party maintainers and developers an opportunity to upgrade their modules to be compatible with Silverstripe CMS 5.

> ### Planning your upgrade

Author: ```suggestion

### Planning your upgrade
```

> Before you begin, you should decide if you intend to do a new major release of your module to add support for Silverstripe CMS 5.

Author: ```suggestion
You should decide if you intend to do a new major release of your module to add support for Silverstripe CMS 5.
```

> Most of the key Silverstripe CMS API have not change between Silverstripe CMS 4 and Silverstripe CMS 5. Take time to read this changelog to identify changes that might be problematic for your project.

Author: ```suggestion
Most of key Silverstripe CMS APIs have not change between Silverstripe CMS 4 and Silverstripe CMS 5. Take time to read this changelog to identify changes that might be problematic for your project.
```

Depending on how complex your module is, it may be completely practical to create a version that works with both Silverstripe CMS 4 and Silverstripe CMS 5. We do not necessarily recommend this approach. But you may wish to consider it to minimise your maintenance burden.

> If you decide that you want to maintain Silverstripe CMS 4 and Silverstripe CMS 5 versions of the module, then you should fork your current development branch.

Author: ```suggestion
If you decide that you want to maintain distinct Silverstripe CMS 4 and Silverstripe CMS 5 versions of your module, then you should fork your current development branch.
```

[info]
If the name of your branch is a number, composer will allow it to be installed as an unstable tag. e.g.: If your module has a `7` branch, composer will alias the `HEAD` of that branch as `7.x-dev`. This will satisfy a constraint like `^7`.
[/info]

### Stop using deprecated code

A good way to identify which APIs need to be updated is to [enable deprecation warnings](/Upgrading/Deprecations) and run your module against the latest Silverstripe CMS 4 release. This will let you remove any references to deprecated APIs in the Silverstripe CMS 4 version of your module.

If you intend to remove some APIs in the Silverstripe CMS 5 version of your module, consider [adding deprecation warnings](/Contributing/Release_Process#Deprecating-API) to the Silverstripe CMS 4 version. This will simplify the upgrade process for projects using your module.

### Upgrade your constraint

> Upgrade your composer requirement constraints to allow the installation of Silverstripe CMS 5 module. If your module has dual support for Silverstripe CMS 4 and 5, you'll want to use constraint like

Author: ```suggestion
Upgrade your composer requirement constraints to allow the installation of Silverstripe CMS 5 module. If your module has dual support for Silverstripe CMS 4 and 5, you'll want to use constraint similar to:
```

```json
"require": {
    "silverstripe/framework": "^4 || ^5",
    "silverstripe/cms": "^4 || ^5",

>     "silverstripe/admin": "^1 || ^2",

Author: ```suggestion
    "silverstripe/admin": "^1 || ^2"
```

}
```

> Otherwise, simply increment you existing constraints to target the Silverstripe CMS 5 version of our modules.

Author: ```suggestion
Otherwise, simply increment your existing constraints to target the Silverstripe CMS 5 version of our modules.
```

### Ship a Silverstripe CMS 5 version of your module

> Obviously, you'll want to test your module against a Silverstripe CMS 5 install to identify and fix any problems. Once you're confident that your module works well with Silverstripe CMS 5, you'll want to tag a new release.

Author: ```suggestion
Obviously, you'll want to test your module against a Silverstripe CMS 5 installation to identify and fix any problems. Once you're confident that your module works well with Silverstripe CMS 5, you'll want to tag a new release.
```

> Consider tagging a beta release if you want to give your users a chance to test drive your module with nte Silverstripe CMS 5 beta.

Author: ```suggestion
Consider tagging a beta release if you want to give your users a chance to test drive your module with the Silverstripe CMS 5 beta.
```

Non-breaking API changes and enhancements may be merged after the initial CMS 5 beta release.

> #### Post CMS5 RC freeze

Reviewer: Does this even belong here? I'm on the fence about it - it definitely needs to be in the RC changelog when we get there but I dunno about this one.

Author: Dropping it in the name of keeping things simple.

Reviewer: But it's still there?

Once the initial CMS5.0 RC is released, non-breaking API changes will no longer be accepted and will have to be targeted to CMS5.1.

Bug fixes may be accepted if they can be solved without changing APIs.

### Known issues

> The Silverstripe CMS 5 beta 1 release contains several know issues. We'll aim to address those prior the Silverstripe CMS 5 Release candidate. These likely only the tip of the iceberg.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Silverstripe CMS 5 beta 1 release contains several know issues. We'll aim to address those prior the Silverstripe CMS 5 Release candidate. There are likely also other regressions we have yet to find.
```
Let's use language that doesn't say "This thing is broken to all hell"

Author: Fair enough.

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=REWeBzGuzCc

> The Silverstripe CMS 5 beta 1 release contains several know issues. We'll aim to address those prior the Silverstripe CMS 5 Release candidate. These likely only the tip of the iceberg.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Silverstripe CMS 5 beta 1 release contains several new known regressions. We'll aim to address those prior the Silverstripe CMS 5 Release candidate. These likely only the tip of the iceberg.
```

Author: I'll just go with "known regressions" ... "new known regressions" is a bit of a pleonasm.

> #### Bugs

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Regressions
```
There are a ton of bugs, which have been around for centuries. We're only interested in listing new regressions.

- [Yubikey registration fails](https://github.com/silverstripe/silverstripe-webauthn-authenticator/issues/124)

> - [Fix broken JavaScript tests](https://github.com/silverstripe/silverstripe-admin/issues/1421)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [JavaScript CI tests are broken](https://github.com/silverstripe/silverstripe-admin/issues/1421)
```
We should use wording that tells people what's specifically wrong, which is not necessarily the same as the issue name.

> - [Clear up errors and warnings when running yarn commands](https://github.com/silverstripe/silverstripe-admin/issues/1416)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [Running yarn commands results in some warnings](https://github.com/silverstripe/silverstripe-admin/issues/1416)
```
I don't think this one is even worth mentioning. It's really more of a tidy-up task, nothing's really _broken_ it's mostly things like linting warnings or using deprecated syntax which doesn't currently affect the end result.

Author: Will remove.

- [React context no longer has "You have unsaved changes" confirm dialog](https://github.com/silverstripe/silverstripe-admin/issues/1409)
- [Cannot delete image in WYSIWYG with delete button](https://github.com/silverstripe/silverstripe-admin/issues/1410)
- [Console error whenever a toast pops up](https://github.com/silverstripe/silverstripe-admin/issues/1412)

#### Partial build failures

> We have partial build failures on these modules.

Reviewer: What does "partial build failure" even mean?
Do we just mean "at least one CI job is failing"? If so, lets say "CI build failures" as the heading and then explain exactly what the situation is in the description. Something like "Some of our modules are failing one or more Continuous Integration job. We've looked at these and decided that none of the failures is critical or warrants holding back the beta release. These are all either problems with out CI build system itself or indications of non-critical regressions."

Author: I steal your explanatory snippet.

- silverstripe/versionned-admin [![CI](https://github.com/silverstripe/silverstripe-versioned-admin/actions/workflows/ci.yml/badge.svg?branch=2)](https://github.com/silverstripe/silverstripe-versioned-admin/actions/workflows/ci.yml)
- silverstripe/campaign-admin [![CI](https://github.com/silverstripe/silverstripe-campaign-admin/actions/workflows/ci.yml/badge.svg?branch=2)](https://github.com/silverstripe/silverstripe-campaign-admin/actions/workflows/ci.yml)
- silverstripe/cms [![CI](https://github.com/silverstripe/silverstripe-cms/actions/workflows/ci.yml/badge.svg?branch=5)](https://github.com/silverstripe/silverstripe-cms/actions/workflows/ci.yml)
- silverstripe/elemental-banner-block [![CI](https://github.com/silverstripe/silverstripe-elemental-bannerblock/actions/workflows/ci.yml/badge.svg?branch=3)](https://github.com/silverstripe/silverstripe-elemental-bannerblock/actions/workflows/ci.yml)
- silverstripe/session-manager [![CI](https://github.com/silverstripe/silverstripe-session-manager/actions/workflows/ci.yml/badge.svg?branch=2)](https://github.com/silverstripe/silverstripe-session-manager/actions/workflows/ci.yml)

> - silverstripe/recipe-ccl [![CI](https://github.com/silverstripe/recipe-ccl/actions/workflows/ci.yml/badge.svg?branch=2)](https://github.com/silverstripe/recipe-ccl/actions/workflows/ci.yml)

Reviewer: The CCL badge shows it as passing

Author: I've removed that one ... my hope is that this list will be trimmed down by the time we tag the beta.

- silverstripe/recipe-content-blocks [![CI](https://github.com/silverstripe/recipe-content-blocks/actions/workflows/ci.yml/badge.svg?branch=3)](https://github.com/silverstripe/recipe-content-blocks/actions/workflows/ci.yml)
- silverstripe/recipe-core [![CI](https://github.com/silverstripe/recipe-core/actions/workflows/ci.yml/badge.svg?branch=5)](https://github.com/silverstripe/recipe-core/actions/workflows/ci.yml)
- silverstripe/staticpublishqueue [![CI](https://github.com/silverstripe/silverstripe-registry/actions/workflows/ci.yml/badge.svg?branch=3)](https://github.com/silverstripe/silverstripe-registry/actions/workflows/ci.yml)

#### Other issues

> `tractorcow/silverstripe-fluent` is temporarily being release under `silverstripe/silverstripe-fluent`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The CMS 5 compatible version of `tractorcow/silverstripe-fluent` is temporarily being released under `silverstripe/silverstripe-fluent`.
```
We should probably give _some_ explanation for this, and say whether we expect this to change or not when we go stable, or for the RC.

Author: I'll use your proposed wording and link off to https://github.com/tractorcow-farm/silverstripe-fluent/issues/776

I didn't want to have a big explanation here because I was afraid this would sound "defensive" and give the wrong impression to people.

## Upgrading your third party module

One of the primary purposes of the beta testing phase is to give third party maintainers and developers an opportunity to upgrade their modules to be compatible with Silverstripe CMS 5.

### Planning your upgrade

You should decide if you intend to do a new major release of your module to add support for Silverstripe CMS 5.

> Most of key Silverstripe CMS APIs have not change between Silverstripe CMS 4 and Silverstripe CMS 5. Take time to read this changelog to identify changes that might be problematic for your project.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Most of the key Silverstripe CMS APIs have not changed between CMS 4 and CMS 5. That said, take time to read this changelog to identify changes that might be problematic for your project.
```
Reading "Silverstripe CMS so many times in a row is a little clunky - but feel free to take or leave that part of this suggestion.

> Depending on how complex your module is, it may be completely practical to create a version that works with both Silverstripe CMS 4 and Silverstripe CMS 5. We do not necessarily recommend this approach. But you may wish to consider it to minimise your maintenance burden.

Reviewer: > We do not necessarily recommend this approach.

I don't think this is worth saying - but if we do say it we should offer some explanation of why not.

Reviewer: No changes were made from this suggestion and no response saying why?

Author: Added this extra clarification: "It may require you to tag a major release later on if you want to make use of new Silverstripe CMS 5 feature later on."

> If you decide that you want to maintain distinct Silverstripe CMS 4 and Silverstripe CMS 5 versions of your module, then you should fork your current development branch.

Reviewer: Why are we saying for them to create a new fork? What do you mean by that?

Reviewer: If you just meant they should have a new branch for the CMS 5 compatible version which is separate from the current cms 4 compatible branch, it's probably best to just explicitly state that. "Fork" in github is its own very specific concept which is more about repositories than it is about branches.

[info]

> If the name of your branch is a number, composer will allow it to be installed as an unstable tag. e.g.: If your module has a `7` branch, composer will alias the `HEAD` of that branch as `7.x-dev`. This will satisfy a constraint like `^7`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the name of your branch is a number, composer will allow it to be installed as an unstable tag. e.g.: If your module has a `7` branch, composer will alias the `HEAD` of that branch as `7.x-dev`. This will satisfy a constraint like `^7`. This is especially useful for some development pipelines and for running tests in a continuous integration environment like Github Actions.
```

[/info]

### Stop using deprecated code

> A good way to identify which APIs need to be updated is to [enable deprecation warnings](/Upgrading/Deprecations) and run your module against the latest Silverstripe CMS 4 release. This will let you remove any references to deprecated APIs in the Silverstripe CMS 4 version of your module.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A good way to identify which APIs need to be updated is to [enable deprecation warnings](/Upgrading/Deprecations) and run your module in a fresh project using the latest Silverstripe CMS 4 release. This will let you remove any references to deprecated APIs in the Silverstripe CMS 4 version of your module.
```

If you intend to remove some APIs in the Silverstripe CMS 5 version of your module, consider [adding deprecation warnings](/Contributing/Release_Process#Deprecating-API) to the Silverstripe CMS 4 version. This will simplify the upgrade process for projects using your module.

### Upgrade your constraints

> Upgrade your composer requirement constraints to allow the installation of Silverstripe CMS 5 module. If your module has dual support for Silverstripe CMS 4 and 5, you'll want to use constraint similar to:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Upgrade your composer requirement constraints to allow the installation of Silverstripe CMS 5 module. If your module has dual support for Silverstripe CMS 4 and 5, you'll want to use a constraint similar to:
```

```json
"require": {
    "silverstripe/framework": "^4 || ^5",
    "silverstripe/cms": "^4 || ^5",
    "silverstripe/admin": "^1 || ^2"
}
```

Otherwise, simply increment your existing constraints to target the Silverstripe CMS 5 version of our modules.

### Ship a Silverstripe CMS 5 version of your module

> Obviously, you'll want to test your module against a Silverstripe CMS 5 installation to identify and fix any problems. Once you're confident that your module works well with Silverstripe CMS 5, you'll want to tag a new release.

Reviewer: I don't know what value this paragraph adds - the first word in it makes it clear it's stuff people already know.

Author: It felt a bit weird to stop the explication at "update your constraints". I can drop the "Obviously" if it makes it sound condescending.

Reviewer: Added a suggestion in a separate comment.

- [Cannot delete image in WYSIWYG with delete button](https://github.com/silverstripe/silverstripe-admin/issues/1410)
- [Console error whenever a toast pops up](https://github.com/silverstripe/silverstripe-admin/issues/1412)

#### Build failures

Some modules are failing one or more Continuous Integration job. We've looked at these and decided that none of the failures are critical or warrants holding back the beta release. These are all either problems with out CI build system itself or indications of non-critical regressions.

- silverstripe/asset-admin [![CI](https://github.com/silverstripe/silverstripe-asset-admin/actions/workflows/ci.yml/badge.svg?branch=2)](https://github.com/silverstripe/silverstripe-asset-admin/actions/workflows/ci.yml)
- silverstripe/blog [![CI](https://github.com/silverstripe/silverstripe-blog/actions/workflows/ci.yml/badge.svg?branch=4)](https://github.com/silverstripe/silverstripe-blog/actions/workflows/ci.yml)
- silverstripe/graphql [![CI](https://github.com/silverstripe/silverstripe-graphql/actions/workflows/ci.yml/badge.svg?branch=5)](https://github.com/silverstripe/silverstripe-graphql/actions/workflows/ci.yml)

> - silverstripe/elemental-userforms [![CI](https://github.com/dnadesign/silverstripe-elemental-userforms/actions/workflows/ci.yml/badge.svg?branch=4)](https://github.com/dnadesign/silverstripe-elemental-userforms/actions/workflows/ci.yml)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
Passing now

Author: Removed.

- silverstripe/versionned-admin [![CI](https://github.com/silverstripe/silverstripe-versioned-admin/actions/workflows/ci.yml/badge.svg?branch=2)](https://github.com/silverstripe/silverstripe-versioned-admin/actions/workflows/ci.yml)
- silverstripe/campaign-admin [![CI](https://github.com/silverstripe/silverstripe-campaign-admin/actions/workflows/ci.yml/badge.svg?branch=2)](https://github.com/silverstripe/silverstripe-campaign-admin/actions/workflows/ci.yml)
- silverstripe/cms [![CI](https://github.com/silverstripe/silverstripe-cms/actions/workflows/ci.yml/badge.svg?branch=5)](https://github.com/silverstripe/silverstripe-cms/actions/workflows/ci.yml)
- silverstripe/elemental-banner-block [![CI](https://github.com/silverstripe/silverstripe-elemental-bannerblock/actions/workflows/ci.yml/badge.svg?branch=3)](https://github.com/silverstripe/silverstripe-elemental-bannerblock/actions/workflows/ci.yml)
- silverstripe/session-manager [![CI](https://github.com/silverstripe/silverstripe-session-manager/actions/workflows/ci.yml/badge.svg?branch=2)](https://github.com/silverstripe/silverstripe-session-manager/actions/workflows/ci.yml)

> - silverstripe/recipe-content-blocks [![CI](https://github.com/silverstripe/recipe-content-blocks/actions/workflows/ci.yml/badge.svg?branch=3)](https://github.com/silverstripe/recipe-content-blocks/actions/workflows/ci.yml)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
Passing now

Author: removed

View the [Silverstripe CMS 5 compatibility](https://github.com/tractorcow-farm/silverstripe-fluent/issues/776) issue on the Fluent repository for progress.

## Upgrading your third party module

One of the primary purposes of the beta testing phase is to give third party maintainers and developers an opportunity to upgrade their modules to be compatible with Silverstripe CMS 5.

### Planning your upgrade

You should decide if you intend to do a new major release of your module to add support for Silverstripe CMS 5.

Most of the key Silverstripe CMS APIs have not changed between CMS 4 and CMS 5. That said, take time to read this changelog to identify changes that might be problematic for your project.

Depending on how complex your module is, it may be completely practical to create a version that works with both Silverstripe CMS 4 and Silverstripe CMS 5. We do not necessarily recommend this approach. It may require you to tag a major release later on if you want to make use of new SilverstripeCMS 5 feature later on. But you may wish to consider this approach to minimise your maintenance burden.

> If you decide that you want to maintain distinct Silverstripe CMS 4 and Silverstripe CMS 5 versions of your module, then you should create a new branch from your current development branch.

Reviewer: This is still a bit unclear what we're actually telling people to do... let's give an example, something like
> If your current CMS 4 compatible version is on the `main` branch, create a new branch off `main` which is named after the current major release of your module - for example, if your current major version is `3`, create a branch called `3` which will continue to be your CMS 4 compatible version. You can then use your `main` branch for the CMS 5 compatible version, and still be able to provide updates to your old version.

That's obviously not quite the right words, that sounds clunky... but I think we need to make it clear what we're saying here if we're offering this advice or it's not obvious _why_ anyone would want to do it (except to people like us, who would already do it).

Author: Added a merge up crash course.

[/info]

### Stop using deprecated code

A good way to identify which APIs need to be updated is to [enable deprecation warnings](/Upgrading/Deprecations) and run your module in a fresh project using the latest Silverstripe CMS 4 release. This will let you remove any references to deprecated APIs in the Silverstripe CMS 4 version of your module.

If you intend to remove some APIs in the Silverstripe CMS 5 version of your module, consider [adding deprecation warnings](/contributing/release_process#deprecating-api) to the Silverstripe CMS 4 version. This will simplify the upgrade process for projects using your module.

### Upgrade your constraints

Upgrade your composer requirement constraints to allow the installation of Silverstripe CMS 5 module. If your module has dual support for Silverstripe CMS 4 and 5, you'll want to use a constraint similar to:
```json
"require": {
    "silverstripe/framework": "^4 || ^5",
    "silverstripe/cms": "^4 || ^5",
    "silverstripe/admin": "^1 || ^2"
}
```

Otherwise, simply increment your existing constraints to target the Silverstripe CMS 5 version of our modules.

### Ship a Silverstripe CMS 5 version of your module

> Obviously, you'll want to test your module against a Silverstripe CMS 5 installation to identify and fix any problems. Once you're confident that your module works well with Silverstripe CMS 5, you'll want to tag a new release.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You should ideally test your module against at least one real Silverstripe CMS 5 project to identify and fix real-world problems. Consider tagging a beta release to give your users a chance to test drive your module with the Silverstripe CMS 5 beta, which will both help you resolve any regressions you hadn't found yourself and give them a chance to update any modules _they_ might have which rely on yours.
```
I've suggested removing the "tag your release" part because that's rather obvious - instead I've stripped this back to just the advice that people _might_ not consider or might be on the fence about.

> Consider tagging a beta release if you want to give your users a chance to test drive your module with the Silverstripe CMS 5 beta.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
If you take my suggestion above, we can remove this paragraph.

Author: Fixed

- silverstripe/staticpublishqueue [![CI](https://github.com/silverstripe/silverstripe-registry/actions/workflows/ci.yml/badge.svg?branch=3)](https://github.com/silverstripe/silverstripe-registry/actions/workflows/ci.yml)

#### Other issues

The CMS 5 compatible version of `tractorcow/silverstripe-fluent` is temporarily being released under `silverstripe/silverstripe-fluent`.

View the [Silverstripe CMS 5 compatibility](https://github.com/tractorcow-farm/silverstripe-fluent/issues/776) issue on the Fluent repository for progress.

## Upgrading your third party module

One of the primary purposes of the beta testing phase is to give third party maintainers and developers an opportunity to upgrade their modules to be compatible with Silverstripe CMS 5.

### Planning your upgrade

You should decide if you intend to do a new major release of your module to add support for Silverstripe CMS 5.

Most of the key Silverstripe CMS APIs have not changed between CMS 4 and CMS 5. That said, take time to read this changelog to identify changes that might be problematic for your project.

> Depending on how complex your module is, it may be completely practical to create a version that works with both Silverstripe CMS 4 and Silverstripe CMS 5. We do not necessarily recommend this approach. It may require you to tag a major release later on if you want to make use of new Silverstripe CMS 5 feature later on. But you may wish to consider this approach to minimise your maintenance burden.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Depending on how complex your module is, it may be completely practical to create a version that works with both Silverstripe CMS 4 and Silverstripe CMS 5. We do not necessarily recommend this approach as it may require you to tag a major release later on if you want to make use of new Silverstripe CMS 5 features later on. But you may wish to consider this approach to minimise your maintenance burden.
```
